== Introduction


=== The ABS Language

The *ABS language* is an actor-based, object-oriented, executable modeling
language.  Its prime features are:

Algebraic user-defined data types and side effect-free functions :: All data
(except the state of objects and future variables) is immutable, and functions
are free of side effects.  This makes understanding and reasoning about models
easier.

User-defined data types are used for data modeling instead of objects, so ABS
models are typically smaller than their Java counterparts.

A syntax that is close to Java :: Programmers that are used to Java can easily
learn the ABS language.

Distributed, actor-based semantics :: Method calls are asynchronous and create
a new process in the target.  Processes are scheduled cooperatively and run
within the scope of one object.  Futures are used to synchronize with and get
the result of another process.

Interfaces for specifying object behavior :: Similar to Java, the behavior of
a class is defined by implementing zero or more interfaces with their
corresponding methods.

Safe concurrency :: Processes run cooperatively within one object and do not
have access to other objects' state, and data structures are immutable.  The
most common error causes of concurrent systems (aliasing, insufficient
locking) are avoided by the language semantics.

Distributed computing :: The combination of asynchronous method calls,
immutability and strong encapsulation makes it very easy to model distributed
systems.

A formal semantics and compositional proof theory :: ABS is designed to be
amenable to program analysis and verification.  A variety of tools (deadlock
checker, resource analysis, formal verification) have been developed.

.Non-goals
****
Languages are eco-systems, and a language containing all possible features
will be easy to use for no one.  The following areas are currently
under-served by ABS:

Parallel computing :: Algorithms relying on multiple processes operating on
mutable state, e.g., from the domain of scientific computing, can only be
expressed in roundabout ways.

Close-to-the-metal programming :: ABS is not designed to be a systems
programming language.
****

[[sec:concurrency-model]]
=== The ABS Actor and Concurrency Model

As mentioned, ABS method calls are asynchronous and create a new process in
the target, while the caller process continues to run in parallel, as shown in
Figure <<fig-future-await>>.  At point ①, P1 issues an asynchronous call to
some object residing on another cog.  In response, a new process P2 is
created; P1 and P2 can run in parallel.  At point ②, P1 needs the result of
the method call and suspends itself.  At point ③, P2 finishes and returns a
value.  P1’s cog then reactivates P1 to continue execution.

[[fig-future-await]]
image::ABS-future-await.png[width=636,height=233,title="Process call semantics",alt="Process call semantics"]

The paragraph above elides some details.  An asynchronous method call (see
<<async-call-expression>>) produces a _future variable_, which is used both to
synchronize with the callee process (see <<await-stmt>>) and to get the result
(see <<get-expression>>).  Future variables are first-class objects that can
be passed along, so multiple processes can synchronize on the same future.


The processes created by method calls are scheduled cooperatively and run
within the scope of the target object.  Objects are grouped into COGs
(Concurrent Object Groups).  Each cog runs one process at a time, while
processes on different cogs run in parallel, as shown in Figure
<<fig-cog-scheduling>>.  This means that each cog is a *unit of concurrency*
and is in charge of scheduling the processes running on its objects.  Each
process runs until it suspends itself (see <<await-stmt>> and
<<suspend-stmt>>) or terminates, at which point the cog chooses the next
process to run.

[[fig-cog-scheduling]]
image::ABS-scheduling.png[width=636,height=283,title="Processes running inside their cogs",alt="Processes running inside their cogs"]


A new cog is created by creating an object with a `new` expression (see Figure
<<fig-object-new-cog>>).

[[fig-object-new-cog]]
image::new-cog-object.png[width=565,height=151,title="Creating an object in a new cog",alt="Creating an object in a new cog"]



An object in an existing cog is created via the `new local` expression (see Figure
<<fig-object-new-local>>).

[[fig-object-new-local]]
image::new-local-object.png[width=593,height=154,title="Creating an object in the same cog",alt="Creating an object in the same cog"]


[[sec:error-model]]
=== Error Propagation and Recovery in ABS

ABS models exceptional (unforeseen and erroneous) situations using exceptions.
This section gives an overview of the language constructs that deal with
exception propagation and recovery.

Exceptions occur when a process cannot continue normal execution, e.g., when
trying to divide by zero or when no pattern in a `case` expression matches the
given value.  Exceptions can also be thrown by the modeler via the `throw`
statement: <<throw-statement>>.  Exceptions thrown implicitly or explicitly
are propagated and handled in the same way.

The modeler can define new exceptions; see <<exception-type>>.

Exceptions can be caught and handled locally, i.e., in a lexically enclosing
`try`-`catch`-`finally` block in the same method (see <<try-catch-finally-stmt>>).
In that case, the process continues execution and will eventually produce a
return value to its future.

In case of an _unhandled_ exception, the future of the process does not
receive a return value; instead, it will propagate the unhandled exception to
the caller (or any process that tries to get its value).  When evaluating
`f.get` on a future that carries an exception instead of a normal return
value, the exception will be _re-thrown_; it can be handled as usual via
`try`-`catch` or left to propagate up the call chain of futures.

Additionally, terminating a process in the middle of execution might leave its
object in an inconsistent state.  To recover from this, ABS uses _recovery
blocks_ (see <<sec:classes>>).  Unhandled exceptions are handed to the
recovery block, which can take appropriate action to re-establish the class
invariant and/or send asynchronous messages to other objects.
